I've been fortunate enough to be able to
collaborate with and generally just hang
out on Discord with a particularly
talented and productive software
engineer over the past few years. This
person, Chiao Tran, for those of you who
may know him from his open source work,
has helped shaped a lot of my workflow
over the years. In general, if I see
Chiao doing something, I can be
reasonably sure I should probably be
doing that as well. One of those things,
something that came up many times, but I
kept putting off bothering to learn, was
git work trees. It sounded hard and
generally I could avoid the scenarios
where it seemed like they were most
useful. Generally, when you suddenly
need to context switch away from
whatever you are working on to do
something else in the codebase, maybe
some kind of hot fix situation or
reviewing a PR. I would generally just
try to avoid those situations by
attempting to get my code to a point
where I could make a clean commit or
worst case scenario I could just stash
the changes. But work trees are actually
pretty simple both conceptually and to
use. Think of one of the main purposes
of Git. It enables multiple developers
working on different file systems to
collaborate on code. You could be
working on one feature on your machine
and file system. Another developer could
be working on another feature on their
machine and file system. And when you're
both done, you smash those features
together and you have one unified
codebase. To understand the problem git
work trees address, let's focus on the
problem AI creates. One that is much
less avoidable than the other situations
I outlined. The problem, or at least a
problem, arises when you're using some
kind of agentic AI process that is going
to be working on a task for any
non-trivial amount of time. Take my
current agentic AI workflow for example.
My general process is that I design a
track which outlines work to be done in
phases. I then trigger my script which
will launch a new AI agent to tackle
each phase in succession until the track
is complete. and then a PR is opened by
the agents for me to review. So, feel
free to drop a comment and subscribe if
you're interested in me diving into this
workflow more. It's more or less the
same Ralph approach a lot of people have
been using lately, but I've been using
it to build out a lot of complex
features and have been having great
success with it. But for this video,
let's just focus on the problem git work
solve. The problem is that these AI
agents are using your file system and
you want to use your file system, too. I
get my Ralph agents to start executing
on a task that is going to take 15
minutes, 30 minutes, an hour maybe, and
I just what? Watch YouTube for a bit
until the PR is ready to review. Not a
bad option, certainly, but not the most
productive one. Likely, I'm also going
to want to work within that same code
base on something else. But I can't
really because the AI agents are making
edits to the same code base on the same
file system at the same time. To deal
with this, we can quite simply create a
git work tree. You can run this command
to create a work tree manually, but
personally I use lazy git and other
tools would support this as well. I can
just come in here and create a new work
tree based off of main. And what this is
going to do basically is create a copy
of the project file somewhere else on
your file system. But both instances of
those files will share the same git
tracking. So I have my main repo called
games and I have a sibling directory
called games work trees and that is
where I want to create this work tree.
And then we can supply a name for the
branch we will be working on. Keep in
mind that you can't have the same branch
checked out in a work tree that you also
have checked out in your main project
folder. I can make changes from within
my main project folder and I can make
changes within my work tree folder.
These two folders can work entirely
independently. And when I am done with
the work tree, I can easily just merge
the branch from the work tree into the
main repo just as if it were a normal
branch. To think of it most simply, work
trees allow you to have different
branches checked out at the same time on
the same file system. And rather than
bothering to create these work trees
myself to deal with the AI problem, I've
just got it incorporated as part of my
agentic AI workflow. Whenever agents
begin work on a new track, they will
first create a work tree and branch for
it. And they will only work within that
work tree, which means I am then free to
work on the main codebase as I please,
and I can just review and merge the PR
from the work tree when I am ready. One
situation that comes up a lot in this
workflow is that I will want to check
out the branch the agents are working on
to test or review it. But if a work tree
has a branch checked out, you can't
actually check out that same branch. But
you can check out a commit in a detached
readonly state. So instead of checking
out the branch itself, you can instead
just check out the latest commit from
that branch. So you can still easily
take a look at work tree branches from
within the main project directory if you
want. Alternatively, especially if you
wanted to make some manual changes, you
could also just switch into working in
the workree folder directly. If you
found this video useful, a like or
subscribe before you go would be greatly
appreciated.